Cardiac Case

Diagnosis: Ductal Dependant Congenital Cyanotic Heart Disease

Clinical Presentation:  Congenital heart disease lesions that require flow through the ductus arteriosus to maintain normal blood pressure tend to present within the first two weeks of life.  Patients may present with increased respiratory rate, and sudden onset of cyanosis and lethargy accompanied by decreased oxygen saturation and decreased blood pressure. Because these lesions require the presence of  a patent ductus arteriosus in order to support blood flow to vital organs, once the ductus closes, these infants will display signs and symptoms consistent with cardiovascular collapse. (Continued as below)

Diagnostic workup, Treatment and interventions, Continued care: Infants may present with tachypnea, sudden onset of cyanosis or pallor that may worsen with crying, sweating with feeds, lethargy, or failure to thrive. With the newborn?s first breath outside the uterus, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) decreases due to the increase in oxygen tension, leading to an increase in pulmonary blood flow. PVR continues to decrease and the right ventricle reaches adult pressures by day 10 of life.

Congenital heart disease lesions that present in the first two to three weeks of life are typically the ductal-dependent cardiac lesions.  The patent ductus arteriosus had been sustaining blood flow for these infants and when the ductus closes after birth, these infants suddenly become ill.  Depending upon the underlying structural abnormality, these neonates will present with either sudden cyanosis or signs of cardiovascular collapse.  With certain lesions, the patent ductus arteriosus supplies the only adequate source of blood flow to the lungs  (e.g. Tetralogy of Fallot or Tricuspid Atresia) – cyanotic congenital heart disease; in others, the newborn is dependent upon the PDA to allow adequate blood flow to the body if the aorta is severely underdeveloped. (e.g. coarctation of the aorta or hypoplastic left heart syndrome).  For example, with coarctation of the aorta, right ventricular blood is ejected through the patent ductus to supply the descending aorta, as it does during fetal life. Perfusion of the lower body is then dependent on right ventricular output.

The cyanotic infant should be placed on 100% oxygen. If the oxygen saturation increases significantly, then the infant probably has pulmonary pathology. If the oxygen saturation does not increase, then consider a congenital heart disorder. The more accurate way to perform this test is to obtain a baseline ABG which is repeated after approximately 10 minutes of oxygen administration. An increase in the PAO2 of 30 torr or more or an increase in saturation of greater than 10% implies a pulmonary process.

If ductal-dependent congenital heart disease is suspected, then a prostaglandin E1 infusion (PGE1) should be initiated at a rate of 0.05-0.1ug/kg/minute. Prostaglandin is a very potent vasodilator and will have immediate effects on the ductus. Improvement is usually seen within fifteen minutes; however, the practitioner should be prepared to intubate since there is an approximately 12% incidence of apnea following PGE1 initiation. Other complications of prostaglandin use include fever, hypotension and seizures.

Always consider sepsis, and have a low threshold to empirically treat for it pending a more thorough work-up.

The differential diagnosis of congenital heart diseases that cause congestive heart failure include not only the left-to-right intracardiac shuns but also hypoplastic left ventricle, coarctation of the aorta, truncus arteriosus, endocardial cushion defect, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), and aortic stenosis (6,7). Time of presentation of each lesion is listed in Table 5. If the patient has congestive heart failure furosemide (1 mg/kg) should be administered with the possible addition of dobutamine and dopamine.